Date: 1791-10-25
President: George Washington

 I meet you, upon the present occasion, with the feelings which   are naturally inspired by a strong impression of the prosperous situation of   our common Country, and by a persuasion equally strong that the labours of the   present45 Session, which has just commenced, will, under the guidance of a spirit   no less prudent than patriotic, issue in measures, conducive to the stability   and increase of national prosperity.   Numerous as are the Providential blessings which demand our grateful acknowledgments;   the abundance with which another year has again rewarded the industry of the   husbandman is too important to escape recollection.  Your own observations, in your respective situations, will have satisfied   you of the progressive state of Agriculture, Manufactures, Commerce and Navigation:   In tracing their causes, you will have remarked, with particular pleasure, the   happy effects of that revival of confidence, public as well as private, to which   the Constitution and Laws of the United States have so eminently contributed:   And you will have observed, with no less interest, new and decisive proofs of   the increasing reputation and credit of the Nation. But you nevertheless, cannot   fail to derive satisfaction from the confirmation of these circumstances, which   will be disclosed, in the several official communications, that will be made   to you in the course of your deliberations.  The rapid subscriptions to the Bank of the United States, which completed   the sum allowed to be subscribed, in a single day, is among the striking and   pleasing evidences which present themselves, not only of confidence in the Government,   but of resource in the community.  In the interval of your recess due attention has been paid to the execution   of the different objects which were specially provided for by the laws and Resolutions   of the last Session.  Among the most important of these is the defence and security of the Western   Frontiers. To accomplish it on the most humane principles was a primary wish.  Accordingly, at the same time that treaties have been provisionally concluded,   and other proper means used to attach the wavering, and to confirm in their   friendship, the well-disposed tribes of Indians; effectual measures have been   adopted to make those of a hostile description sensible that a pacification   was desired upon terms of moderation and justice.  These measures having proved unsuccessful, it became necessary to convince   the refractory of the power of the United States to punish their depredations.   Offensive operations have therefore been directed; to be conducted however,   as consistently as possible with the dictates of humanity. Some of these have   been crowned with full success, and others are yet depending. The expeditions   which have been completed were carried on under the authority, and at the expense   of the United States by the Militia of Kentucke; whose enterprise, intripidity   and good conduct, are entitled to peculiar commendation.  Overtures of peace are still continued to the deluded Tribes, and considerable   numbers of individuals belonging to them, have lately renounced all further   opposition, removed from their former situations, and placed themselves under   the immediate protection of the United States.  It is sincerely to be desired that all need of coercion, in future, may cease;   and that an intimate intercourse may succeed; calculated to advance the happiness   of the Indians, and to attach them firmly to the United States.  In order to this it seems necessary: That they should experience the benefits   of an impartial administration 46 of justice. That the mode of alienating their   lands the main source of discontent and war, should be so defined and regulated,   as to obviate imposition, and, as far as may be practicable, controversy concerning   the reality, and extent of the alienations which are made. That commerce with   them should be promoted under regulations tending to secure an equitable deportment   towards them, and that such rational experiments should be made, for imparting   to them the blessings of civilization, as may, from time to time suit their   condition. That the Executive of the United States should be enabled to employ   the means to which the Indians have been long accustomed for uniting their immediate   Interests with the preservation of Peace. And that efficatious provision should   be made for inflicting adequate penalties upon all those who, by violating their   rights, shall infringe the Treaties, and endanger the peace of the Union.   A System corrisponding with the mild principles of Religion and Philanthropy   towards an unenlightened race of Men, whose happiness materially depends on   the conduct of the United States, would be as honorable to the national character   as conformable to the dictates of sound policy.  The powers specially vested in me by the Act laying certain duties on distilled   spirits, which respect the subdivisions of the districts into Surveys, the appointment   of Officers, and the assignment of compensations, have likewise been carried   into effect. In a matter in which both materials and experience were wanting   to guide the calculation, it will be readily conceived that there must have   been difficulty in such an adjustment of the rates of compensation as would   conciliate a reasonable competency with a proper regard to the limits prescribed   by the law. It is hoped that the circumspection, which has been used will be   found in the result to have secured the last of the two objects; but it is probable,   that with a view to the first, in some instances, a revision of the provision   will be found adviseable.  The impressions with which this law has been received by the community, have   been, upon the whole, such as were to be expected among enlightened and well-disposed   Citizens, from the propriety and necessity of the measure. The novelty, however   of the tax, in a considerable part of the United States, and a misconception   of some of its provisions, have given occasion, in particular places to some   degree of discontent. But it is satisfactory to know that this disposition yields   to proper explanations and more just apprehensions of the true nature of the   law. and I entertain a full confidence, that it will, in all, give way to motives   which arise out of a just sense of duty, and a virtuous regard to the public   welfare.  If there are any circumstances, in the law, which consistently with its main   design, may be so varied as to remove any well intentioned objections, that   may happen to exist, it will consist with a wise moderation to make the proper   variations. It is desirable on all occasions, to unite with a steady and firm   adherence to constitutional and necessary Acts of Government, the fullest evidence   of a disposition, as far as may be practicable, to consult the wishes of every   part of the Community, and to lay the foundations of the public administration   in the affection 47 of the people.   Pursuant to the authority contained in the several Acts on that subject, a district   of ten miles square for the permanent seat of the Government of the United States   has been fixed, and announced by proclamation; which district will comprehend   lands on both sides of the River Potomack, and the towns of Alexandria and George   Town. A City has also been laid out agreeably to a plan which will be placed   before Congress: And as there is a prospect, favoured by the rate of sales which   have already taken place, of ample funds for carrying on the necessary public   buildings, there is every expectation of their due progress.  The completion of the Census of the Inhabitants, for which provision was made   by law, has been duly notified (excepting in one instance in which the return   has been informal, and another in which it has been omitted or miscarried) and   the returns of the Officers, who were charged with this duty, which will be   laid before you, will give you the pleasing assurance that the present population   of the United States borders on four Millions of persons.  It is proper also to inform you that a further loan of two millions and a   half of Florins has been completed in Holland; the terms of which are similar   to those of the one last announced, except as to a small reduction of charges.   Another on like terms, for six Millions of Florins, had been set on foot under   circumstances that assured immediate completion.  Gentlemen of the Senate:  Two treaties, which have been provisionally concluded with the Cherokees and   Six Nations of Indians, will be laid before you for your consideration and ratification.  Gentlemen of the House of Representatives:  In entering upon the discharge of your legislative trust, you must anticipate   with pleasure, that many of the difficulties, necessarily incident to the first   arrangements of a new Government, for an extensive Country, have been happily   surmounted by the zealous, and judicious exertions of your predecessors, in   co-operation with the other branch of the legislature. The important objects,   which remain to be accomplished, will, I am persuaded, be conducted upon principles   equally comprehensive, and equally well calculated for the advancement of the   general weal.  The time limited for receiving subscriptions to the loans proposed by the   Act making provision for the debt of the United States having expired, statements   from the proper department will, as soon as possible, apprize you of the exact   result. Enough, however is already known, to afford an assurance that the views   of that Act have been substantially fulfilled. The subscription in the domestic   debt of the United States, has embraced by far the greatest proportion of that   debt; affording at the same time proof of the general satisfaction of the public   Creditors with the System which has been proposed to their acceptance, and of   the spirit of accommodation to the convenience of the Government with which   they are actuated. The subscriptions in the debts of the respective States,   as far as the provisions of the law have permitted, may be said to be yet more   general. The part of the debt of the United States, which remains unsubscribed,   will naturally engage your further deliberations.  It is particularly pleasing to me to be able to announce to you, that the   revenues which have been established, promise to be adequate to their objects;   and may be permitted, if no unforeseen exigency occurs, to supercede, for the   present, the necessity of any new burthens upon our Constituents.  An Object which will claim your early attention, is, a provision for the current   service of the ensuing year, together with such ascertained demands upon the   Treasury as require to be immediately discharged; and such casualties as may   have arisen in the execution of the public business, for which no specific appropriations   may have yet been made; of all which a proper estimate will be laid before you.  Gentlement of the Senate,   and of the House of Representatives:  I shall content myself with a general reference to former communications for   several objects, upon which the urgency of other affairs has hitherto postponed   any definite resolution. Their importance will recall them to your attention;   and I trust that the progress already made in the most arduous arrangements   of the Government, will afford you leisure to resume them with advantage.  There are, however, some of them of which I cannot forbear a more particular   mention. These are, the Militia; the Post-Office and Post-roads; the Mint; Weights   and Measures; a provision for the sale of the vacant lands of the United States.  The first is certainly an object of primary importance, whether viewed in   reference to the national security, to the satisfaction of the community, or   to the preservation of order. In connection with this, the establishment of   competent Magazines and Arsenals, and the fortification of such places as are   peculiarly important and vulnerable, naturally present themselves to consideration.   The safety of the United States, under Divine protection, ought to rest on the   basis of systematic and solid arrangements; exposed as little as possible to   the hazard of fortuitous circumstances.  The importance of the Post-Office and Post-Roads, on a plan sufficiently liberal   and comprehensive, as they respect the expedition, safety and facility of communication,   is increased by the instrumentality in diffusing a knowledge of the laws and   proceedings of the government; which, while it contributes to the security of   the people, serves also to guard them against the effects of misrepresentation   and misconception. The establishment of additional cross-posts, especially to   some of the important points in the Western and Northern parts of the Union,   cannot fail to be of material Utility.  The disorders in the existing currency, and especially the scarcity of small   change, a scarcity so peculiarly distressing to the poorer classes, strongly   recommend the carrying into immediate effect the resolution already entered   into concerning the establishment of a Mint. Measures have been taken, pursuant   to that Resolution, for procuring some of the most necessary Artists, together   with the requisite Apparatus.  An uniformity in the weights and measures of the Country is among the important   objects submitted to you by the Constitution, and if it can be derived from   a standard at once invariable and universal, must be no less honorable to the   public Councils than conducive to the public convenience.  A provision for the sale of the vacant lands of the United States is particularly   urged, among other reasons, by the important considerations that they are pledged   as a fund for reimbursing the public debt; that if timely and judiciously applied,   they may save the necessity of burthening our citizens with new taxes for the   extinguishment of the principal; and that being free to discharge the principal   but in a limited proportion no opportunity ought to be lost for availing the   public of its right.